Title: 2606.10044v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10044v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:07:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Business World Model 

Cecil Pang 1, 2 

> 1

AI Engineering, USA TODAY Co., Inc., New York, USA 

> 2

School of Systems Science and Industrial Engineering , Binghamton University, State University of New York , Binghamton, USA 

ORCID: 0009 -0003 -1725 -7873 

Hiroki Sayama 2, 3, 4 

> 2

School of Systems Science and Industrial Engineering, Binghamton University, State University of New York, Binghamton, USA 

> 3

Binghamton Center of Complex Systems, Binghamton University, State University of New York, Binghamton, USA 

> 4

Waseda Innovation Lab, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan 

ORCID: 0000 -0002 -2670 -5864 

Abstract — Businesses are increasingly adopting AI -enabled tools 

to improve productivity, reduce costs, and enhance products and 

services. However, the transformative potential of AI extends 

beyond automating predefined tasks: it lies in enabling intelligent 

systems to plan, optimize, and execute business initiatives from 

high -level strategic objectives. This paper introduces the concept 

and architecture of a business world model (BWM), a world model 

specialized for business and organizational environments. 

Inspired by world models in artificial intelligence, cognitive 

science, and control theory, a BWM encodes business states, 

dynamics, constraints, objectives, and feasible action space to 

support autonomous decision -making. We propose a business -

semantics -centric formulation in which business states , dynamics 

and actions are linked to key business entities. Within this 

framework, agents can simulate alternative action sequences, 

estimate their effects on future business outcomes, and evaluate 

trade -offs unde r uncertainty. The proposed architecture 

integrates semantic data representations, probabilistic machine 

learning models, deterministic business rules, and explicit action 

space into a coherent structure for planning and counterfactual 

reasoning. Although its individual components are not new, the 

contribution of BWM lies in organizing them as an executable 

internal simulator for business initiatives. This work establishes a 

conceptual foundation for autonomous business systems capable 

of moving from instru ction -based execution toward goal -driven 

planning and execution .

Keywords —business world model, world model , autonomous 

business system, AI agent 

I. INTRODUCTION 

A. Motivation 

Businesses have rapidly adopted AI -enabled tools to 

introduce new product capabilities, improve productivity, 

reduce operating costs, or pursue all three objectives 

simultaneously. We argue, however, that the significance of AI 

extends well beyond incremental tool support. Contemporary AI 

systems have the potential to ignite business growth by 

fundamentally changing how businesses are planned, 

coordinated, and executed. Rather than requiring executives to 

specify detailed instructions for every task within a business 

initiative, future business systems operate from strategic 

outcome specifications, with intelligent systems performing 

planning and optimization to decompose goals into 

interdependent tasks , execut e the tasks and adapt as internal or 

external conditions change. 

Today, a business initiative of a media subscription company 

might be defined like the following :

“Identify subscribers who pay more than $10 per month, are in 

churn -risk tier 4, and live in cities where their household 

income s are above the median, then send them a 10% discount.” 

According to Pang and Sayama [1] , a neuro -symbolic AI system 

can autonomously and reliably execute an initiative like this. We 

propose going a step further: the autonomous system should not 

only execute a predefined plan but also perform the planning and 

optimization that come before exe cution . Instead of specifying 

the exact execution logic and parameters , the user would specify 

the desired business outcome :

“Reduce the overall churn rate of paid subscribers by 2%. 

Propose two campaigns. Each campaign may target no more 

than 20,000 subscribers, and total revenue must not decline by 

more than 0.1%.” 

The autonomous system would then generate two campaign 

options and execute the one that is selected. For example, it 

might propose: 

Campaign 1: Target subscribers who pay more than $10 per 

month, are in churn -risk tier 4, and have household income 

above their city’s median. Offer them a 10% discount. The 

model estimates that this campaign would reduce the paid -

subscriber churn rate by 2.1%, with n o revenue loss. 

Campaign 2: Target subscribers who pay more than $15 per 

month, are in churn -risk tier 3, and have household income 

above their city’s median. Offer them a 10% discount. The 

model estimates that this campaign would reduce the paid -

subscriber churn rate by 2.1%, while decreasing revenue by 

0.05%. 

To generate campaigns that can achieve the stated business 

goals, the autonomous system must be able to answer three key 

questions :

• What actions can be taken to reduce churn ?

• How does each action affect churn? 

• How does each action affect revenue? 

More generally, for an autonomous system to propose action 

plans that achieve a specified outcome subject to given 

constraints, it must be able to :• identify actions that could help achieve the stated goals ,

• run internal simulations over different parameter settings 

to search for plans that meet those goals , and 

• monitor the side effects of those simulated plans to 

ensure that all specified constraints are satisfied .

Figure 1 is a comparison of the proposed goal -driven 

autonomous business system with today’s instruction -based 

system. 

B. Our Contribution 

We present the concept and architecture of a business world 

model (BWM) as a foundational component of the autonomous 

business system described above. Drawing inspiration from 

world models of the physical world , a BWM encodes the state s,

dynamics, and actions of a business environment, allowing 

intelligent agents to evaluate possible courses of action and plan 

multi -step initiatives toward desired outcomes . To the best of 

our knowledge, this work is the first to introduce the concept of 

a business world mod el. 

We begin by reviewing the concept of world model in the 

literature and its historical foundations. Building on this 

background, we introduce the concept of a BWM and articulate 

the problem context. We then present the architecture of BWM 

in a modern -day data -rich business environment . This work 

focuses on the conceptual architecture and its prospective 

implementation. 

II. BACKGROUND 

A. What is a World Model 

A world model in the context of intelligent agents is an 

internal representation that the agent use to reason about the 

environment in which they operate [2], [3] . Specifically, it 

supports understanding the current state as well as predicting 

future states. In other words, it models the spatial and temporal 

dynamics of the environment: how states evolve over time, what 

plausible future states are, how actions infl uence them, and how 

observations relate to underlying states. When equipped with a 

world model, an agent can simulate possible futures, evaluate 

hypothetical actions, and select one that maximizes the 

likelihood of achieving a goal. This leads to more inte lligent 

behavior than simply reacting to current observations at every 

step. 

One main motivation for world models is inspired by 

biological intelligence . Humans and animals do not learn solely 

by going through all the scenarios by trial and error in the 

physical world, and do not need to know for certain all possible 

consequences before taking actions [4] . This is especially true 

when there is perceived immediate danger. Rather, they 

mentally rehearse actions , perhaps unconsciously , imagine 

consequences based on the current understanding of the 

environment (which could be limited and full of uncertainties), 

generalize when necessary, make decisions, and take actions. 

This is in essence a planning process. This also implies that some 

model (or models ) of the world must exist in the mind so that 

carrying out this planning process is possible. When these world 

models are incomplete or uncertain, surprises may arise when 

predictions about sensations are different from what are 

observed from the environment [5] .

Another motivation is to overcome a major constraint in 

training the current deep learning -based models. Deep learning 

models require a very large number of samples of the 

environment that covers a broad spectrum of the reality in order 

to learn and genera lize [6] . Collecting these training samples are 

often not feasible. Interacting directly with the real environment 

can be expensive, time consuming, and even dangerous in some 

cases. A learned world model allows an agent to shift part of its 

learning and decision -making into an internal simulation, with 

the expectation that it would generalize to the real -world 

scenarios [2], [3] .

In modern AI, world models are typically learned from data 

and often take the form of probabilistic models that map from 

latent states and actions to predicted future states and 

observations [3], [7] . This means it can also suffer from the same         

> Fig .1.Comparison of today's instruction -based system with the proposed goal -driven autonomous business system. In today's approach (top), a human
> specifies exact execution steps, which the system follows literally to produce a single, fixed output —with no planning and no alternatives. In the proposed approach
> (bottom), a human specifies only the desired business ou tcome, and the system autonomously plans, optimizes, and executes .It generates multiple candidate action
> plans, selects the one that best meets the stated goals and constraints, and carries it out. This shift from instructing how to declaring what is ena bled by a Business
> World Model that allows the system to reason about possible actions, simulate their consequences, and satisfy specified busin ess constraints.

constraint of requiring very large amount of training data. It is 

also possible that parts of the (latent states + actions --> future 

states + observations) pipeline are not differentiable and 

therefore gradient -based learning is not possible. In this case ,

world models need to mix in other gradient -free methods such 

as heuristic search and predicate logic [4] .

In summary, a world model is not just a static description of 

the environment; it is a spatial and temporal model that can be 

rolled forward in time to support prediction, planning, and 

“what -if” analysis. It allows agents to learn from imagined 

experience rather than solely depending on real interactions .

B. Historical Foundation 

The modern idea of a world model is an internal model that 

AI agent s use to dry run scenarios before choosing a course of 

actions. This is important because real interactions with the 

environment in which the agent s operate are often expensive and 

have undesirable side effects. However, this idea did not entirely 

originate from the field of AI. Rather, it emerged gradually 

across multiple fields that were all trying to solve a similar 

problem: how can a system behave intelligently beyond relying 

solely on immediate sensory input? In engineering, the 

challenge was in operating physical systems under 

environments that were not fully under control. In psychology 

and neuroscience, it was in explaining flexible behavior such as 

generalization and skilled movement. In AI, it was in planning 

and decision -making beyond reflexive stimulus -response 

policies. Historically, world model ideas appear ed in: 

• Control theory and cybernetics: internal models as a 

requirement for robust regulation and prediction. 

• Cognitive science and neuroscience: cognitive maps, 

mental models, and simulation as mechanisms for 

intelligent behavior. 

• AI and decision theory: explicit environment models for 

planning (symbolic and probabilistic) and later for 

reinforcement learning .

What is striking is that each of them arrived at a similar thesis: 

to control or understand a system, you need some internal 

structure that models its regularities well enough to support 

prediction and counterfactuals. 

The concept of world models also has its root in the internal 

models in control theory and cybernetics. It was neatly 

summarized in the article title of [8] : “Every good regulator of a 

system must be a model of that system”. This does not mean the 

regulator has an exact copy of the system. It would not be 

practical or even useful that way. Rather, it implies that optimal 

regulation requires modelling of the dynamics of the system. In 

control theory, Francis and Wonham [9] stated the Internal 

Model Principal that “suitably reduplicated model of the 

dynamic structure of the disturbance and reference signals” is 

required in the feedback path to the regulator. In modern 

engineering control, Model Predictive Control (MPC) is a set of 

advanced control methods used in many engineering fields. It 

makes use of a process model to predict the future behavior of 

the controlled system [10] . These are very close to the modern 

world model intuition: good control requires an internal 

predictive model that guides the actions of the agent s.

Cognitive maps and mental models in psychology can also 

be framed as world models. Tolman [11] argued that behavior 

in rat maze experiments was better explained by internal map -

like representations than by simpl y sequences of stimulus -

response. This was historically important because it suggested 

that animals (rats) learned structured internal representations (a 

map) of the environment (maze), which helped them make 

moves to find the food faster (goal) . This cognitive map is 

essentially a world model, which is a reusable representation 

that supports inference and planning. From this angle, the 

cogni tive -map theory contributes two important ideas :

• world models can be latent structures, and 

• these latent structures enable generalization and 

planning, not merely simple reactions to stimulations. 

Another remarkable direct historical statement of the world 

model concept was Kenneth Craik’s work on explanation and 

thought, where he framed cognition in terms of small -scale 

models of external reality that the brain used to make predictions 

and try out possibl e scenarios without physically acting on them 

[12] . Perception and linguistic comprehension yields mental 

models, while “thinking and reasoning are internal manipulation 

of mental models” [13] .

Classical AI treated world models as symbolic logic 

systems, and explicit models were used for planning and acting. 

For example, Fikes and Nilsson [14] encoded actions as 

operators with preconditions and effects such that planning was 

framed as search through a world model of state changes. While 

AI’s earliest successes in planning required a hand -crafted world 

model, by the late 20th century, researcher s were already 

proposing learned, differentiable internal models. Sutton’s Dyna 

architecture [15] explicitly integrated learning a model from 

experience, planning with simulated (“hypothetical”) 

experience, and reactive execution. Schmidhuber [16] used 

supervised recurrent neural networks to model environment 

dynamics for planning and reinforcement learning. These were 

early attempts for learned world models and were direct 

ancestors of modern learned latent dynamics model used for 

planning. In the deep learning era, world models are compressed 

latent variables learned from a large number of data samples and 

then policies are trained using these learned model, as proposed 

by Ha and Schmidhuber [2] .

C. Related Work 

Recent advances in world model research have produced a 

diverse set of systems, many of which are optimized for a 

particular domain or simulation setting. Despite this diversity, 

they have a notable commonality: most of them place strong 

emphasis on video or image generation and on the visual fidelity 

of generated content. This shared focus is especially visible 

across gaming, 3D scene generation, physical control, and 

general -purpose video generation, even though these syste ms 

differ substantially in archi tecture, objectives, and domain 

applications .

In the domain of gaming world models, systems such as 

Project Genie by Google Labs [17] , Muse by Microsoft 

Research [18] , and Oasis [19] use generative models to simulate 

video game environments from visual and action inputs. These 

systems are highly domain specific and produce plausible trajectories and up to minutes of continuous gameplay. There are 

also general -purpose video generation models such as OpenAI 

Sora [20] and Google DeepMind Veo [21] . These models are 

designed to generate high -quality video from textual prompts 

and, in some cases, prior frames. Their outputs can be visually 

striking, but strictly speaking they are not world models because 

they do not explicitly support reasoning and planning. 

A related line of work concerns 3D scene world models, 

such as World Labs [22] and similar efforts. These systems 

focus on visually compelling 3D scene generation and 

egocentric navigation . The y represent important advances in 3D 

scene synthesis by pushing the frontier of spatial realism. They 

are the first to propose 3D as an interface for humans and 

machines to “communicate about space, collaborate on designs, 

and create new environments” .

In physical world modeling, systems such as Wayve GAIA -

2 [23] and NVIDIA Cosmos [24] target domains including 

autonomous driving, robotic manipulation, and embodied 

navigation. These models demonstrate strong capabilities in 

representing low -level physics and sensorimotor dynamics 

across varied environmental conditions such as lighting, 

we ather, and geography. They are typically tightly coupled to 

their task domains and often rely on specialized sensors, data 

pipelines, or control architectures .

A conceptually distinct direction is represented by two 

notable recent developments: joint embedding predictive 

architectures (JEPA) [4] and PAN [25] . The JEPA family of 

systems includ es V-JEPA 1 and 2 [26], [27] , DINO -WM [28] ,

and PLDM [29] . Instead of predicting and generating realistic 

environment scenes ( pixels ), the se JEPA world models predict 

future latent embeddings through encoder -encoder architectures 

trained with energy -based losses. This approach is appealing 

because it avoids the full burden of pixel -level reconstruction of 

the observable world from the latent embeddings and may offer 

a more tractable route to abstraction. However the authors of 

PAN believe that grounding the latent embeddings to the 

environment through real sensor y inputs is necessary to avoid 

representation collapse or unidentifiability [30] . The 

architecture of PAN [25] combines an autoregressive latent 

dynamics model grounded in large -scale text knowledge with a 

video diffusion decoder, allowing it to link language -

conditioned reasoning about future states with detailed visual 

simulation. Trained on diverse video -action data, PAN aims to 

move beyond narrow domain -specific world models by 

supporting open -domain, natural -language -conditioned 

simulation. 

III. BUSINESS WORLD MODEL 

A. Definitions and Problem Context 

Inspired by the concept of world models, and especially by 

architectures such as PAN and JEPA, a business world 

model (BWM) is designed to support planning, counterfactual 

reasoning, and the autonomous execution of business initiatives. 

Figure 2 depicts the core perception –prediction –action loop of a 

BWM . It shows how an agent receives observations from the 

business environment and uses them to build and continuously 

update the BWM, which is an internal representation of the 

business world . Drawing on this representation, the agent 

predicts possible future states and evaluates the likely 

consequences of alternative actions before committing to one. 

Supported by the BWM, the agent goes beyond simple reaction .

It reasons over the modeled states, dynamics, and action space 

to plan multi -step business initiatives, simulate their outcomes, 

and select the most promising course of action s to execute. Once 

an action is taken, it changes the world, producing new 

observations and events that are fed back into the BWM ,

allowing the agent to adapt its understanding and refine future 

action plans. In this way, the BWM serves as the internal 

simulator that enables intelligent agent s to autonomously plan, 

optimize, and execute business initiatives in pursuit of desired 

outcomes. 

A BWM may be understood as a world model specialized 

for business organizational environments . It encodes :

• organization - and market -specific states , including 

customers, demand signals , products, constraints, and 

operational capacity, 

• strategic and operational relationships , such as those 

among pricing, adoption, churn, and revenue, 

• the space of feasible actions available to business 

initiative s, and  

> Fig .2

. Business world model supported agent loop for business                     

> initiatives. The diagram illustrates how an agent interacts with the business
> environment through acontinuous perception –prediction –action cycle.
> Observations from the environment are used to update an internal business world
> model (BWM) , which supports the prediction of future states and the evaluation
> of alternative paths of actions. This BWM enabl es the agent to simulate
> scenarios, plan multi -step business initiatives, and execute actions aimed at
> achieving desired business outcomes. Feedback from the environment is then
> used to refine the BWM and improve subsequent decisions.

• the state -dependent effects of those actions on future 

outcomes .

As illustrated in Figure 3, BWM provides a foundation for 

autonomous business decision -making through scenario 

simulation, action -sequence evaluation, and trade -off analysis 

under uncertainty .

Business initiatives —such as product launches, market 

expansions , and customer churn reduction —require decisions 

under partial observability, shifting conditions, and strategic 

interaction. Unlike the physical environment , where agent 

behavior can be modeled according to stable and universal 

physical laws that enable reliable trajectory simulation, business 

environments lack universally valid and predictive “laws of 

business” . Business outcomes depend on heterogeneous and 

context -sensitive factors: organiza tional structure, incentives, 

regulation, competition, customer behavior, macro conditions ,

and many more . As a result, business decision support is often 

fragmented across :

• narrative strategy artifacts (e.g. plans, frameworks, 

playbooks), 

• descriptive analytics (e.g. dashboards and KPI 

monitoring), and 

• isolated predictive or optimization tools ( e.g. forecasting 

models, pricing models, capacity planning tools ). 

These components rarely , if ever, compose into a coherent 

architecture that can be queried, simulated, and reused across 

business initiatives. This is what a B WM provides. 

The key challenge of designing a BWM is in grounding and 

executability. While large bodies of codified knowledge exist in 

business management education and practice (e.g., strategy 

frameworks, operational best practices), they are primarily 

represented as text and are difficult to operationalize directly. 

Quantitative tools such as operations research and machine 

learning models can optimize specific subproblems but typically 

presume well -defined objectives, variables, and constraints. The 

central scientifi c and engineering challenge of architecting a 

BWM is therefore to :

1. extract , organize, and integrate heterogeneous business 

knowledge and tools, and 

2. ground it first in the context of a business and then in the 

local context of business initiative s.

BWM provide s a systematic framework to this challenge and 

make the knowledge and tools useful for planning and decision -

making by autonomous AI agents .

B. Business Semantics Centric 

We propose a business semantics centric approach to 

modeling states, dynamics, and action space, following Pang 

[31] . This approach models :

• the entities , attributes and relationships among them that 

shape business performance ,

• the dynamics among them under uncertainty , and 

• the feasible actions that can influence these entities ,

which in turn contribute to the success of business 

initiatives. 

The central idea is that the elements most relevant to business 

initiative s are those tied to the business’s key entities, such 

as consumer , product , and subscription . A BWM should 

therefore not attempt to represent every aspect of a business. 

Instead, it should focus on the aspects of state s, dynamics and 

actions that are useful for scenario simulations in support of 

autonomous agents in business initiatives. This is in line with 

the suggestion by LeCun [4] that “ it would be useful to have a 

way to bias the system towards representations that contain 

information relevant to a class of tasks ”. As shown in Figure 4,

linking these elements to key business entities is the first step 

toward grounding them in business context and rendering them  

> Fig .3

. Conceptual diagram of a Business World Model (BWM). A BWM serves as a specialized world model for organizational environments. It operates by 

> encoding current business states, strategic and operational dynamics, and feasible actions to model the state -dependent effects of potential initiatives. By capturing
> these elements, the architecture provides a foundation for autonomous decision support, enabling intelligent agents to conduc t scenario simulations, evaluate action
> sequences, and perform trade -off analysis under uncertainty.

queryable and actionable for the planning and execution of 

business initiatives by autonomous agents .

C. State s, Dynamics and Action Space 

In order for a goal -directed agent to simulate and plan multi -

step trajectory under conditions with uncertainty , it must be able 

to make probabilistic predict ion of the next state based on a 

given current state and a hypothetical action. Formally :

𝑆 !"# ~ 𝑃 (𝑆 !"# | 𝑆 !, 𝑎 !)

𝑎 ! ∈ 𝐴 (𝑆 !)

where 𝑆 ! is the state at time step 𝑡 ; 𝑎 ! is a hypothetical action 

taken ; and 𝐴 (𝑆 !) is the space of feasible actions available when 

the state is 𝑆 !.

Under a business -semantics -centric formulation, the state of 

a business 𝑆 ! is represented by its key entities, the attributes of 

those entities, and the relation ships among them. For example, 

in the context of a media subscription company , consumers and 

their profile attributes represent a central component of the 

business state. Likewise, the subscriptions associated with those 

consumers, along with attributes such as monthly subscription 

rate and tenure of the subscription , constitute an equally 

important part of that state. 

The ability of a business to systematically collect, maintain, 

and update this semantic information contributes to the quality 

and overall usefulness of the state representation available to 

intelligent agents . Given such a state representation, business 

growth can be understood as the selection of actions that move 

the business toward more desirable future states 𝑆 !"$ . This 

requires agents to know not only about which actions are 

feasible 𝐴 (𝑆 !), but also about how the business state is expected 

to evolve in response to those actions —that is, about the 

dynamics of the business system 𝑃 (𝑆 !"# | 𝑆 !, 𝑎 !) . In this 

formulation, feasible actions are actions that a busi ness can take 

and directly modify the value of one or more attributes of a 

business entity. For example, changing the price of a product is 

a feasible action; here, product is the entity, and price is one of 

its attributes .

However , the set of feasible actions a business can take is 

often limited , and not all entity attributes are directly changeable 

through available actions. Indeed, attributes that characterize 

desirable business outcomes are often not directly controllable. 

If they were, business growth would be a trivial optimization 

problem. For this reason, a BWM must maintain an explicit 

action space 𝐴 (𝑆 !) that agents can use to simulate alternatives 

and support decision -making . The central challenge is then to 

understand how feasible actions applied to controllable 

attributes can indirectly influence non -controllable outcome 

attributes. This is where system dynamics become essential —it 

describes how entities interact and how states evolve under 

uncertainty . A BWM must capture how entity attributes are 

interrelated, how changes propagate across entities and 

relationships, and ultimately how controllable inte rventions can 

move the business toward desired future states .

In contemporary data -driven businesses, these dynamics are 

often approximated through multivariate machine learning 

models that estimate relationships among selected entity 

attributes. Trained on historical data from internal operational 

systems and external data providers, such models capture 

recurring patterns in bus iness behavior while accounting for the 

uncertainty inherent in business environments. For example, a 

churn model may predict the likelihood that a consumer will 

discontinue use of the product or service based on the monthly 

subscription rate the customer is paying, recent activity, 

frequency of product website visits, and engagement patterns .

Dynamics are, however, not limited to trained models. 

Depending on the industry and individual business, there may 

be business rules or regulations that are deterministic. These 

rules can be, for example, coded in logic programs. 

Figure 5 illustrates the three core components of a BWM: 

state s, dynamics and action space. 

D. Incremental Development of BWM Capabilities 

An important property of the proposed BWM architecture is 

that it provides a systematic framework for incrementally 

expanding its capabilities over time. At an early stage, a business 

may collect data and build predictive models for only a limited 

set of e ntities, attributes, and relationships. As the business 

grows, additional data sources, entities, and predictive models 

can be incorporated into the BWM, increasing both the breadth 

and depth of its planning capabilities. In this way, the BWM can 

evolve fr om supporting narrow, localized decisions to enabling 

more comprehensive reasoning across business functions. This 

incremental path makes it essential for businesses to adopt a 

business -semantics -centric data system [31] early in their 

development , so that current and future data collection, 

modeling, and planning capabilities can be built on a coherent 

semantic foundation .

IV. CONCLUSIO N, LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK 

We introduce the novel concept and architecture of a 

business world model (BWM), organized around the framework 

proposed by Xing et al. [30] , which characterizes the 

development and training of world models in terms of five key 

aspects: data, representation, architecture, objective, and usage.  

> Fig .4

. Business -semantics -centric representation in a Business World     

> Model (BWM) .The BWM organizes state s, dynamics, and feasible actions
> around key business entities in order to ground them in business context. This
> entity -centered representation makes the modeled elements queryable and
> actionable for scenario simulation and decision -making, while deliberate ly
> excluding aspects of the business environment that are not relevant to the
> business initiative sat hand or not actionable .

Although many individual components of the proposed BWM, 

such as entity relationships and probabilistic machine learning 

models, are not themselves new, the contribution of the BWM 

lies in integrating these components into a coherent structure 

that enables intelligent agents to reason about business states, 

simulate alternative courses of action, and make effective 

autonomous decisions. 

As an initial conceptual contribution, this work focuses on 

defining the conceptual architecture and foundations of a BWM 

rather than presenting a full implementation. This creates a clear 

opportunity for future research to apply the proposed 

architecture into working prototypes and empirically evaluate its 

practical value in real business settings. A useful next step would 

be to conduct a case study, such as a customer churn reduction 

initiative described in the beginning of this paper , to examine 

how a BWM can support goal -driven planning, simulation, and 

autonomous decision -making in practice. 

REFERENCES 

[1] C. Pang and H. Sayama, “Autonomous Business System via Neuro -

symbolic AI,” in 2026 IEEE International Systems Conference (SysCon) ,

Apr. 2026, pp. 1 –8. doi: 10.1109/SysCon66367.2026.11503621. 

[2] D. Ha and J. Schmidhuber, “Recurrent World Models Facilitate Policy 

Evolution,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,

Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. Accessed: Jan. 07, 2026. [Online]. 

Available: 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/2de5d16682c3c35007e4 

e92982f1a2ba -Abstract.html 

[3] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi, “Dream to Control: 

Learning Behaviors by Latent Imagination,” presented at the 

International Conference on Learning Representations, Sep. 2019. 

Accessed: Jan. 08, 2026. [Online]. Available: 

https://openrevie w.net/forum?id=S1lOTC4tDS 

[4] Y. LeCun, “A Path Towards Autonomous Machine Intelligence Version 

0.9.2, 2022 -06 -27”. 

[5] K. Friston, “The free -energy principle: a unified brain theory?,” Nat. Rev. 

Neurosci. , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 127 –138, Feb. 2010, doi: 10.1038/nrn2787. 

[6] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature , vol. 521, 

no. 7553, pp. 436 –444, May 2015, doi: 10.1038/nature14539. 

[7] J. Schrittwieser et al. , “Mastering Atari, Go, chess and shogi by planning 

with a learned model,” Nature , vol. 588, no. 7839, pp. 604 –609, Dec. 

2020, doi: 10.1038/s41586 -020 -03051 -4. 

[8] R. C. CONANT and W. and ROSS ASHBY, “Every good regulator of a 

system must be a model of that system †,” Int. J. Syst. Sci. , vol. 1, no. 2, 

pp. 89 –97, Oct. 1970, doi: 10.1080/00207727008920220. 

[9] B. A. Francis and W. M. Wonham, “The internal model principle of 

control theory,” Automatica , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 457 –465, Sep. 1976, doi: 

10.1016/0005 -1098(76)90006 -6. 

[10] M. Schwenzer, M. Ay, T. Bergs, and D. Abel, “Review on model 

predictive control: an engineering perspective,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. 

Technol. , vol. 117, no. 5, pp. 1327 –1349, Nov. 2021, doi: 

10.1007/s00170 -021 -07682 -3. 

[11] E. C. Tolman, “Cognitive maps in rats and men,” Psychol. Rev. , vol. 55, 

no. 4, pp. 189 –208, 1948, doi: 10.1037/h0061626. 

[12] D. Williams, “Predictive minds and small -scale models: Kenneth Craik’s 

contribution to cognitive science,” Philos. Explor. , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 

245 –263, May 2018, doi: 10.1080/13869795.2018.1477982. 

[13] P. N. Johnson -Laird, “The history of mental models,” in Psychology of 

Reasoning , Psychology Press, 2004. 

[14] R. E. Fikes and N. J. Nilsson, “Strips: A new approach to the application 

of theorem proving to problem solving,” Artif. Intell. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 

189 –208, Dec. 1971, doi: 10.1016/0004 -3702(71)90010 -5. 

[15] R. S. Sutton, “Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and 

reacting,” SIGART Bull , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 160 –163, Jul. 1991, doi: 

10.1145/122344.122377. 

[16] J. Schmidhuber, “An on -line algorithm for dynamic reinforcement 

learning and planning in reactive environments,” in 1990 IJCNN 

International Joint Conference on Neural Networks , Jun. 1990, pp. 253 –

258 vol.2. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN.1990.137723. 

[17] “LABS.GOOGLE.” Accessed: May 24, 2026. [Online]. Available: 

https://labs.google/ 

[18] A. Kanervisto et al. , “World and Human Action Models towards 

gameplay ideation,” Nature , vol. 638, no. 8051, pp. 656 –663, Feb. 2025, 

doi: 10.1038/s41586 -025 -08600 -3. 

Fig . 5. State s, dynamics , and action space in a Business World Model (BWM). Th is diagram illustrates the three core components of a BWM. Current 

state captures the current values of entity attributes, partitioned into controllable attributes that can be directly modified by feasible actions (e.g., product price o r

discount) and non -controllable attributes that cannot be directly changed (e.g., customer churn risk). Dynamics , typically approximated through machine learning 

models trained on historical data, or coded business rules, describe how entit ies interact and how the business sta te evolves under uncertainty. Together, current 

state, actions and dynamics determine the future state , such as desirable outcome attributes such as revenue and customer retention. The central challenge: feasible 

actions can only indirectly influence desirable outcomes through the system's dynamics by acting on controllable attributes. [19] “Oasis: A Universe in a Transformer.” Accessed: May 24, 2026. 

[Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=ocMWhGLHqu 

[20] “Video generation models as world simulators,” OpenAI. Accessed: May 

24, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/video -

generation -models -as -world -simulators/ 

[21] “Veo 3.1,” Google DeepMind. Accessed: May 25, 2026. [Online]. 

Available: https://deepmind.google/models/veo/ 

[22] “Research & Insights | World Labs.” Accessed: May 24, 2026. [Online]. 

Available: https://www.worldlabs.ai/blog 

[23] L. Russell et al. , “GAIA -2: A Controllable Multi -View Generative World 

Model for Autonomous Driving,” arXiv.org. Accessed: May 24, 2026. 

[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.20523v1 

[24] NVIDIA et al. , “Cosmos World Foundation Model Platform for Physical 

AI,” arXiv.org. Accessed: May 24, 2026. [Online]. Available: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.03575v3 

[25] P. A. N. Team et al. , “PAN: A World Model for General, Interactable, 

and Long -Horizon World Simulation,” Nov. 15, 2025, arXiv :

arXiv:2511.09057. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.09057. 

[26] A. Bardes et al. , “Revisiting Feature Prediction for Learning Visual 

Representations from Video,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , May 2024, 

Accessed: May 25, 2026. [Online]. Available: 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=QaCCuDfBk2 

[27] M. Assran et al. , “V -JEPA 2: Self -Supervised Video Models Enable 

Understanding, Prediction and Planning,” 2025, arXiv . doi: 

10.48550/ARXIV.2506.09985. 

[28] G. Zhou, H. Pan, Y. LeCun, and L. Pinto, “DINO -WM: World Models 

on Pre -trained Visual Features enable Zero -shot Planning,” presented at 

the Forty -second International Conference on Machine Learning, Jun. 

2025. Accessed: May 25, 2026. [Online]. Available: 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=D5RNACOZEI 

[29] V. Sobal, W. Zhang, K. Cho, R. Balestriero, T. G. J. Rudner, and Y. 

LeCun, “Learning from Reward -Free Offline Data: A Case for Planning 

with Latent Dynamics Models,” presented at the The Thirty -ninth Annual 

Conference on Neural Information Processing Syst ems, Oct. 2025. 

Accessed: May 25, 2026. [Online]. Available: 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=hTZ0SJCGQX 

[30] E. Xing, M. Deng, J. Hou, and Z. Hu, “Critiques of World Models,” Jul. 

27, 2025, arXiv : arXiv:2507.05169. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.05169. 

[31] C. Pang, “Toward Data Systems That Are Business Semantic Centric and 

AI Agents Assisted,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 113752 –113762, 2025, 

doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3583260.